over the past week. Massive protests
have erupted across Iran,
>> calling for economic reform and an end
to the regime.
In recent days, a full picture of the
government's crackdown on the protesters
has emerged, garnering worldwide
condemnation.
>> We don't want to see what's happening in
Iran happen.
>> And threats of action from [music]
President Trump.
>> One thing, when they start killing
thousands of people and now you're
telling me about hanging, we'll see how
that works out for them. It's not going
to work out good.
>> From the [music] New York Times, I'm
Rachel Abrams and this is the Daily.
Today, [music]
my colleague Farnaz Fihi on what's
driving the protesters [music] and why
the Iranian regime has never been closer
to collapse.
[music]
It's Wednesday, January 14th.
Fern, thank you so much for joining us.
>> Thank you for having me. Fernas, you
have been covering Iran for decades and
we at the Daily turn to you during these
huge moments of disruptions, eruptions,
which is what it feels like we are in
right now in Iran. We're talking to you
Tuesday afternoon at about 1:30 p.m. And
I'd like for you to start off by
characterizing what we are seeing on the
ground right now.
For the past week, we've seen nationwide
protests in cities big and small, across
different demographics erupt all across
Iran with a singular demand for the end
of the Islamic Republic's rule.
And this is coupled with an external
threat from the United States and
Israel.
>> Uh that there might be a military strike
on Iran and an economy that's in tail
spin which is creating a very unique and
difficult challenge for the government
because it's facing a kind of a perfect
storm. But we're also seeing the
government brutally responding to these
protests and violent crackdown unfolding
with thousands of people killed and
injured and bodies are piling up at the
morg and at the cemetery as reports of
the killings trickle out. So as you said
it is a perfect storm of things that the
regime is dealing with in terms of
threats. So, I want to start with the
protests themselves and what's going on
inside the country. Can you just talk a
little bit about what's driving people
to the streets?
>> People are just fed up, Rachel. They
feel like they've got nothing to lose.
That this government is either unwilling
or incapable of bringing the kind of
change that people want to see in their
lives. ranging from social freedom to
political freedom and of course the
economy which is fueling these protests.
Now we have to remember that Iran's
economy has been in shambles for years.
President Trump reimposed sanctions on
Iran targeting its oil revenues and
international banking structures in 2018
when he exited the nuclear deal between
Iran and world powers.
In the fall, the United Nations Security
Council re-imposed UN sanctions on Iran
through a mechanism known as snapback
related to Iran standoff with Europeans
in the United States over the nuclear
program.
And from then the currency started
falling even further than it had before.
But in December, [music]
on December 28th, the real plunged to an
all-time low against the US dollar and
it sort of unleashed this wave of anger
because when the currency free falls, it
has a direct impact on inflation and on
the prices of everyday goods, including
food items. [music]
Inflation is now around 60%.
Prices of everyday goods [music] such as
cooking oil, rice, eggs, like staples of
an Iranian grocery basket suddenly
tripled overnight.
So this wave of protest that we're
seeing now started in Thran's bazar,
[music]
which is really the pulse of Iran's
economy. The bazar is the equivalent of
the stock market here, right? So when
the bazaris go on strike it really can
paralyze the economy. And the reason the
bazaris went on strike was because the
real was plunging against the dollar.
The prices were fluctuating and they
were facing too much instability.
you know from hour to hour they had to
adjust the prices of what they had to
buy and what they had to procure and
what they had to sell because they
didn't know within a few hours what the
price of uh US dollar against the real
was going to be and there was this sense
that we want to put pressure on the
government and the central bank to try
to stabilize the currency because we
just can't operate this way [music]
and then it spread it first spread to
workingass areas to small towns that are
underdeveloped that are economically on
a lower level and it sort of percolated
that way for about a week. And how did
the government respond to all of this
growing unrest?
>> The government initially responded with
a more consolatory tone with the
president Masud Peshan saying, "You're
all my children. The protesters have a
legitimate reason to protest. we
understand and we feel bad. And then he
moved very quickly to take measures that
he thought would contain and appease
particularly the bazaar. He sacked the
governor of the central bank. He also
announced a new currency policy. And
then the government announced that it
was giving every Iranian a monthly
stipend of $7,
which because of the inflation, it could
only buy you a bottle of cooking oil.
But the measures that he was taking not
only did little to appease people, but
they also had an opposite effect. So, it
sort of reinforced this feeling that the
people who are in charge don't really
know what they're doing and things are
not going to get better. And that fueled
more anger that sparked more outrage and
you know momentum was sort of building
for people to come out in larger numbers
and say enough is enough.
>> So, we're talking about a crisis that is
largely sparked. it sounds like from
this spiraling economy. But I think that
a lot of people who are listening to
this are going to remember another
protest just a few years ago that
started over women's rights. And there
was a question then too about whether
these protests whether this unrest would
actually topple the regime. Obviously
that did not happen. But can you talk a
little bit more about why more broadly
Iranians are unhappy with the government
that goes beyond the economic reasons
you've just laid out?
The Iranian society
is very different from the government
and clerics that rule it.
>> The majority of people are a lot less
religious than what the state wants and
what the state has has enforced. They
are not ideological. Sort of the
ideology of the Islamic Republic of the
1970s were anti-American. We're
anti-imperialist.
And that has faded in generation after
generation. And the younger generation,
as we've seen in videos coming out, in
protests of of the women led uprising
that you mentioned, want a different
kind of a life. They're super plugged in
on social media. They see how the rest
of the world is living, how their
counterparts in other countries, not
just in Europe and the US, but in
Turkey, in Dubai, in you know, other
Muslim countries, they have social
freedom. They have economic prosperity.
And they're saying, why not us? Iran's a
very resourcerich country. It has oil
resources, energy resources. And what I
hear from many Iranians is that this is
not a government and a system that we
deserve. M
>> we have to remember that over the past
two decades there have been waves of
pro-democracy
protests happening in Iran starting with
the student activist movement in 1999
the green movement in 2008 the women led
protests an uprising in 2022
all of them grassroots and mobilized and
organized by activists and leading
opposition figures inside the country
such as Iran's most prominent human
rights activist Narus Muhammadi who's a
Nobel Peace Prize laurate who's
currently in jail and many people look
up to her as a leader of this
pro-democracy movement. So, we see all
of these forces at play on the streets
across Iran.
In videos that we're seeing coming from
the protests that have gone viral, we
hear crowds chanting death to the
dictator,
death to the oppressor, whether be it
king or the supreme leader. Clerics get
lost.
>> [cheering]
>> We're also hearing crowds chant long
live the sha a reference to the last
monarch of Iran Mahasha
who was toppled in the 1979 revolution
in what seems to be a nostalgic call for
an era that Iranians remember pre the
revolution
and we're seeing young men and women
crowds forming in in different parts of
the capital in Tehran and other cities.
Fists in the air chanting,
freedom, freedom,
oadi.
So it sounds like this is really the
culmination of a deep disconnects
between the Iranian people and its
leadership which at least as you said
initially seemed sympathetic to the
movement and its concerns but clearly we
know that the situation has turned very
bloody and very hostile and violent and
I wonder when did that switch happen and
what have we seen in terms of the
violence that's gone on on the ground?
The change of rhetoric from the
government started when the supreme
leader Ayat delivered a public speech
[music]
>> labeling protesters as rioters and
saying they were the agents of the
United States and Israel.
and they were [music] destabilizing the
country, working for Iran's enemies.
[music]
Iran's [music] chief judiciary also said
that there would be no mercy for anyone
arrested and [music] justified the
crackdowns by pointing out to widespread
vandalism and burning of public
properties and cars and even [music]
attacks on mosques and police stations
that they had seen.
now now.
>> And then on Thursday when the crowds
swelled in the streets
[music]
>> and the cries for freedom grew louder,
please shut up.
>> The government unplugged the internet
and plunged the country into total
darkness.
They blocked incoming and outgoing
international calls, making it really
difficult for anyone outside to get
visibility about what was really going
on. Cell phone reception inside the
country has also been disrupted in what
seems to be an effort to try to stop
people from organizing and mobilizing
protests.
By Sunday, a picture was emerging that a
massacre was unfolding in Iran. I've
been able to communicate to protesters,
to doctors, nurses,
and people who have been on the ground
through satellite internet connection
that they may be able to find. Everyone
that I spoke to who's been out to
protest has seen someone get shot and
killed in front of him. M
>> two people told me that they saw snipers
in two different parts of the city
shooting down at the crowds. A friend
who was in central Tehran described a
horrific scene of security forces
gunning down young people, a young crowd
of men and women with machine guns and
people falling on top of each other.
Nurses and doctors that I've been able
to connect with described absolutely
horrific scenes unfolding at hospitals.
People shot at close range in the head,
in the torso, from the back.
>> One video that went viral was of a
Iranian wildlife photographer.
His face is bloody. Blood dripping from
his face. And he's addressing the camera
saying
>> to the security forces, "How can you
fire your own countrymen? Killing a
person is like a game for them. I swear
to God, we're also citizens of this
country. We have pain."
Videos we're seeing from Terron's morg
show bodies in bags piled in the parking
lot and on the ground
>> and families wailing and screaming as
they're going through them trying to
identify [music] their loved ones.
[crying]
This is a level of violence [music] and
cruelty that I haven't seen in the 30
years that I've been covering Iran.
>> What you are describing, Fernas, is just
horrific and inconceivable I think to a
lot of people. Just these scenes of
absolute carnage all over Iran. And I
wonder whether the brutality of this
response is working for the regime in
terms of actually quelling the protests
or whether it perhaps is having an
opposite effect on people and what
they're willing to do in the face of all
of this opposition.
The situation is very fluid.
>> [music]
>> The protests have attracted
international attention, pressure on the
Iranian government, and of course the
unpredictable variable of whether the
United States is going to take military
action against Iran.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Fernas, at the beginning of this
conversation, we talked about internal
forces on Iran and external forces on
Iran. So, I want to go external now. Can
you talk about what has happened outside
of Iran that has led to this moment and
had such an impact? Remember that Iran
has had a really tough year. In June,
Iran had a intense 12-day war with
Israel when Israel launched surprise
attacks on Iran's military structure and
took out its military command chain and
nuclear scientists.
>> Iran was able to strike Israel with a
barrage of ballistic missiles. But that
war exposed Iran's weakness in terms of
being able to defend itself. And the war
of course culminated with the United
States getting involved and bombing and
severely damaging Iran's nuclear
facilities.
>> Another dynamic at play here is that
Iran's regional standing has changed.
its militant allies around the region
that it helps arm and fund like
Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza
have been decimated and weakened by
Israel. Iran had counted on these
groups, particularly Hezbollah and and
Syria, the base that it had in Syria, as
a way to exert pressure and as sort of a
forward defense that it would say, well,
if you attack me, I can also fire and
create problems across the region. In
that sense, Iran has really been
weakened. How should we be accounting
for all of that? The embarrassment, the
evident vulnerability. Is that on the
minds of these protesters that we're
seeing out on the streets now?
>> Of course, I think that all of this
feeds into the momentum where it
emboldens people taking to the streets
thinking maybe this is the moment. We've
talked about how one big open question
right now is how the United States is
going to respond. And President Trump
has said on multiple occasions he's
willing to take action in defense of the
protesters. On Tuesday even he put a
post on Truth Social urging people to
continue protesting. He said that uh
they will pay a big price referring to
the regime. So, what do we know about
how [clears throat]
the regime is thinking about the
president and his threats?
>> Iran's leadership is taking the threats
and rhetoric coming from President Trump
very seriously. They of course have the
experience of the US bombing the nuclear
facilities, but also what happened in
Venezuela, right, really rattled them
because there was this sense that
President Trump is not bluffing and
he'll actually carry out what he says.
From my conversations with a few
government officials, we know that the
Iran's National Security Council
conducted an emergency meeting to talk
about how they would prepare. I know
that Iran's armed forces have been put
on the highest alert possible
anticipating an attack and the
government has said that if the US
attacks us, we are going to retaliate
forcefully against American targets and
ships and military bases in the region
and we will also attack Israel. So it
seems like they're preparing for war.
There's also some broader context that
we should not neglect here about the
relationship between President Trump and
Iran, which has for years been extremely
antagonistic. During the first Trump
administration, President Trump killed
Iran's top general that led to an
Iranian assassination plot against
President Trump. But I've also been
having a lot of conversations more
recently with colleagues in the newsroom
who cover the administration about how,
if at all, any of that that I've just
described plays into Trump's decision-m.
And they've told me a range of answers
that this could be about regime change
right now. It could also be about oil,
but it is also about power and how Trump
exerts it. So I wonder what you make of
all of this Fern just trying to put
together all of this context history and
the latest comments we've seen from the
president. What is your assessment about
sort of why the United States is
considering some of this action? Well,
we don't know for sure what President
Trump's motivations are. We don't even
know if he's going to go ahead and
topple the Iranian regime. He has said
previously that the US does not want to
engage in nation building and regime
change anymore.
But it's also possible that President
Trump sees some benefits to eliminating
the Iranian government's rule because it
would end nearly five decades of
animosity between Iran and the United
States. It would also remove a
government that has been hostile to not
just the United States, but also to
Israel. There's also a slight chance
that this could help realign the Middle
East in ways that could benefit and
secure American interests. And of
course, Iran is an oil rich country, so
there's also the energy factor there,
too. But we also know from history,
including recent history, that military
interventions in the Middle East carries
enormous risks. I was a war
correspondent in the Middle East. I
covered the Afghanistan war in its
aftermath, Iraq, Syria, and we've seen
that the US can win the military war
because of its military might, but it
can't win the long war or the long
peace. That stability and a smooth
transition have been elusive in other
places where the US intervened, namely
Iraq. The United States own history with
Iran is also checkered. In 1953, the
United States intervened and toppled a
democratically elected government of
Prime Minister Mosad and reinstalled the
sha through a CIA coup. And many
Iranians will tell you that that killed
the path that the country was on toward
becoming a democracy or a republic. And
within a few decades it exploded in an
Islamic revolution. And you know usually
regimes and governments are toppled
either by defections and coups inside or
by military interventions. We haven't
seen any major defections among the
military ranks of Iran's armed forces.
We haven't seen defections among the
political class. So right now there's no
sign that something's going to happen
from within. And for all the reasons
that we have discussed, a military
intervention to topple the government
could actually bring about years of
instability.
>> What might that instability look like
for Nause?
>> Well, I think for one thing, the fight
for what Iran's future might be, what
kind of a various opposition groups that
are very divided and don't have a
unified vision even currently. So, how
would that play out? There are ethnic
minorities in Iran that have aspirations
for separatism, for federalism. There
are also forces in the region, including
the Islamic State terrorists, including
militant Islamic forces that might, like
they did in Iraq, like they did in
Syria, might see a power vacuum in Iran
and pour into the country and use that
as a power base. M
>> and also we have to also remember that
the Iranian government does have a
support base of about at least like 10%.
It does have armed revolutionary guards
and paramilitary force that are loyal to
it. So you could see also a scenario
where they would form armed insurgencies
and fight whatever is the next
government.
>> These are scenarios that are not
fantasies. And it's important to keep a
clearey and sober view of what the
options are and what the outcomes may
be.
>> Fernaz, you have seen and covered
decades worth of uprisings in Iran. And
I wonder what you think it would do to
the Iranian psyche and to the people who
are in the streets right now at such
great personal risk if ultimately
nothing really changes in Iran and the
status quo remains. The current uprising
in Iran has created a sliver of light
and hope for Iranians inside and for the
diaspora watching what's unfolding in
their country. And I think for people to
feel they're so close to change and to
freedom and for it to be crushed would
be devastating, would be heartbreaking.
But I don't think it would be the end of
the aspirations of the Iranian people.
[music]
I think no matter how much force the
government uses
and the level of crackdowns,
it can crush protests periodically,
but it can't kill the dream as it hasn't
been able to in previous protests. The
[music] protests have built upon each
other over the years. And what I hear
this time and what [music] I see is that
the Iranian people have lost their fear.
>> Fernaz, [music] thank you so much.
>> Thank you for having me.
We'll be right [music] back.
Here's
what else you need to know today.
[music] On Tuesday, six federal
prosecutors in Minnesota resigned in
protest over the Justice Department's
push to investigate the widow of Renee
Good, [music] the protester killed by an
ICE agent last week. At least one of the
prosecutors, Joseph Thompson, [music]
reportedly also objected to the
department's refusal to investigate the
shooter.
Johnson and another prosecutor [music]
were leading the sprawling fraud
investigation that has royal the state
in recent weeks.
[music]
And
Bill and Hillary Clinton are refusing to
testify [music] in the congressional
investigation of Jeffrey Epstein,
escalating a month-slong battle with the
Republican representative James Comr
[music] of Kentucky, who chairs the
oversight committee and who said he
would hold the couple in contempt. The
strategy to push the Clintons to testify
[music] reflects Comr's overall
approach. Deflect focus from President
[music] Trump by redirecting it to
prominent Democrats who also associated
with the convicted sex offender and his
longtime [music] companion Gileain
Maxwell.
[music]
Today's episode was produced by Mooch
Sadi, Michelle Banja, and Jessica
[music] Chung with help from Ricky
Netski. It was edited by Michael Benwis
and Patricia Willins, [music] contains
music by Diane Wong, Marian Lozano, and
Pat McCusker, and was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
[music]
That's it for [music] the Daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.